                          Clusters V2.0


+--------------------------------------+
| First, some background               |
+--------------------------------------+

A "cluster" is smallest unit of disk space that can be allocated to a
file.  When you format a disk (either a floppy or a hard disk), the
format program marks off the clusters, and creates a "road map",
called the file allocation table, (or FAT), that DOS uses to keep
track of where your files are stored.  In the early days of computers,
when DOS was designed, hard disk storage was *very* expensive;  no one
even dreamed of the 1 gigabyte drives we have today.  So, in the
interest of saving a little room in the operating system, DOS was
designed so that it can only keep track of about 65,000 clusters in
the FAT.

The actual number of bytes in a cluster depends on the size of the
hard disk partition being formatted. Pretend you only know how to cut
a pie into eight pieces.  If you cut up a 6 inch pie, then cut up a 12
inch pie, each pie has only eight pieces, but obviously the 12 inch
pie has bigger pieces.  The same thing happens to hard disks.  The
clusters on small hard disks have relatively small sizes;  on larger
hard disks, the clusters may be very big.  For example, on a 200MB
hard disk, the cluster size is 4K, or 4,096 bytes. On a 1.6 gigabyte
(1600MB) hard drive, the cluster size is 32K, or eight times as big.

Remember that earlier I said that a cluster is the smallest amount of
disk space that can be given to a file. Files bigger than the cluster
size are simply allocated as many clusters as needed to store them.  A
2Kbyte file, for example, always takes up one cluster.  In our
examples from just a minute ago, that means that on the 200MB hard
drive, it is allocated 4K, leaving about 2K unused.  This unused
portion is called "slack space".  Virtually every file on your hard
drive will have some slack space, because none of them will neatly fit
exactly into a multiple of the cluster size of your hard disk.  But on
a large hard drive, that same small file (2K), is allocated a single
cluster of 32K of space -- 30K of disk real estate is wasted!

I have been using small files in my examples.  As we all know, some
files on your system are very large. A large file wastes very little
disk space, relatively speaking.   On a disk with 32K clusters, a file
with 2,353,234 bytes (about 2.3MB) will have approximately 72 clusters
allocated to it, with 26K of slack space in the last one, or a waste
of about 0.1%.  Not bad.  The trick, though, if figuring out whether
or not you are making good use of the space on your disk.


+-------------------------------------------+
|  What CLUSTERS does                       |
+-------------------------------------------+

The CLUSTERS utility can examine all of the files on a given drive
hard drive (or a subdirectory), and reports the amount of space
allocated, space used, and space wasted.  It is a great diagnostic
tool to see how much of your hard disk is going to waste because of
the size of it's clusters.  After examining a drive, CLUSTERS can
optionally show you a list of the directories on the drive, with a
breakdown done by directory. This information can help you plan how to
arrange the files and directories in your system if you have more than
one hard drive or partition.

Using the utility is simple.  Enter the command CLUSTERS at the DOS
prompt, and tell it which drive you would like to examine.  The
program then looks at the drive and displays a running total of what
it's found.  On the main screen, it will display all the possible
cluster sizes, and how much waste you would have under each one.  The
cluster size that your hard disk is currently using is highlighted.


+-------------------------------------------+
|  What you should have                     |
+-------------------------------------------+

The zip file CLUSTERS2.ZIP should contain the following files:

    CLUSTERS.TXT   -- this file
    CLUSTERS.EXE   -- the executable program
    SOURCE.ZIP     -- a zip file that contains the PowerBASIC source
                      code for clusters.

    SOURCE.ZIP will contain:

       CLUSTER2.BAS  --  The source code for CLUSTERS
       PB3BOXES.PBL  --  A library of window routines used by CLUSTERS
       PB3BOXES.BU   +
       VERTMENU.BU   |
       BOXMGR.BU     +-- Source for the PB3Boxes Library
       PB3BOXES.INC  |
       PB3BOXES.HDR  +
       PB3BOXES.TXT  --  Readme for same


+-------------------------------------------+
|  Legal stuff                              |
+-------------------------------------------+

CLUSTERS and it's associated source code are free for use, but are not
public domain.  That means that you are free to use, copy and
distribute CLUSTERS, provided that:

   1) You do not profit from it
   2) All copyright notices embedded in the source code and executable
      files remain intact.

Portions of the source code for PB3BOXES are copyright PowerBASIC,
INC, and are distributed with permission.  All other code remains
Copyright of Nathan C. Durland III.


+------------------------------------------------+
| How do I reduce the waste on my hard drive?    |
+------------------------------------------------+

Setting up a hard disk for use with DOS, Windows, or Windows95 is a
two stage process.  First, a utility called FDISK is used to create
partitions on the hard disk.  DOS then assigns a drive letter to each
partition. Generally speaking, new computers come setup with the hard
disk configured as one large partition.  The partition is then
formatted using the FORMAT utility.  Format examines the partition,
and selects a cluster size based on it's size.

If you discover that your hard drive is wasting a great deal of space
because it has clusters that are too large, you must reduce the size
of the partition using FDISK and FORMAT.  Here is a guide for
partition and cluster sizes:

          Partition size              Cluster size
             0MB -  128MB               2048 bytes
           129MB -  256MB               4096 bytes
           257MB -  512MB               8192 bytes
           513MB - 1.02GB              16284 bytes
          1.02GB - 2.04GB             32768 bytes


+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Remember:  USING FDISK DESTROYS ALL THE DATA ON YOUR HARD DRIVE.  |
|  Make sure you have backups before you begin.  Enlist the help of  |
|  your computer dealer if you are unsure of how to proceed.         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+


If you find this utility useful, please let me know.  My E-Mail address
is bdurland@northnet.org, or you can FAX comments to (518) 834-9934.


+-------------------------------------------+
|  Legal stuff                              |
+-------------------------------------------+

CLUSTERS and it's associated source code are free for use, but are not
public domain.  That means that you are free to use, copy and
distribute CLUSTERS, provided that:

   1) You do not profit from it
   2) All copyright notices embedded in the source code and executable
      files remain intact.

Portions of the source code for PB3BOXES are copyright PowerBASIC,
INC, and are distributed with permission.  All other code remains
Copyright of Nathan C. Durland III.

