
**THE GEEWHIZ COLLECTION**

**The Incredible GW-BASIC Works of Thomas C. McIntire.**

**This entire collection is now available as FREEWARE.**

Tom McIntire has had a distinguished career as a programmer, most of
which was concerned with creating business applications with GW-BASIC.
In the course of doing this, he developed many tools to make his work
easier and more efficient. He also collected over the years a great deal
of information that was not only vital to the GW-BASIC programmer, but
of use to almost any programmer. Here gathered together in one place is
the information, tools and some of the programs. Formerly Shareware, he
has kindly released them as Freeware.  

**REFERENCE MATERIAL**  
[BLUE: A complete book on GW-BASIC programming](../files/blue.exe)  
This author has always believed that really good programs can only be
written by coders that are thoroughly versed in their preferred
language. This book describes the nitty-gritty needed by anyone that
wants to contend they are truly versed in the GW-BASIC language. In days
of yore, in fact, on early generation PCs, this level of knowledge was a
must for writers of commercially viable business and accounting
applications. In those years too, professionals had to devise their own
tools. To do so in GWB sweat shops, one had to "know" what is in these
pages. In fact, much of the detail here can now only be found here. Old
manuals are hard to find, of course, and even so, none of them contained
many of the gems in this manuscript. For serious students of the BASIC
language, BLUE is well worth reading for its historical perspective. It
is also a worthwhile read for those wanting to better understand the
differences between interpreters and compilers.  

[GeeWhiz: An online programming manual for
GW-BASIC](../files/geewhizx.exe)  
Program architecture and PAC file scheme are author's own invention. An
early design requirement was to be able to ship (unzipped) on 720 kb
floppies. The early versions were packaged as shareware. The shareware
aspects were removed in 1998. Today it is truly freeware. This product
has been updated at least once annually since 1990. Some "advice" is
still in original form because it is no less valid today than in the
80's. This product works on virtually any PC running DOS 3.1 or later.
It works fine on Windows 3.0, 3.1, 95 and 98. It supports use of a
Mouse, but works fine without one. It includes a "print page"
capability, but that can be a BOAB sometimes with Windows. No other
known GWB "manual" is as complete, or as comprehensive as this product.  

