ASIC Copyright (c) 1994 by 80/20 Software -- All Rights Reserved
ASIC Version 5.00 README File

Your ASIC package should contain the following files:

     INSTALL.EXE    ASIC installation program.  To install ASIC,
                    change your working directory to the directory
                    containing the ASIC5.00 files and type INSTALL.  For
                    example, if your ASIC 5.00 files are in the root
                    directory of the diskette in drive "A", then type:

                         A:        <enter>
                         CD\       <enter>
                         INSTALL   <enter>

     XPAND.EXE Decompression program (required by INSTALL.EXE)
     README    This file
     VENDOR.DOC  Information for Shareware Distributors wishing to
               distribute ASIC.
     ASIC.PAK  Includes the following compressed files:
               ASIC.EXE       ASIC Integrated Editor/Compiler
               ASICC.EXE      ASIC Command Line Compiler
               BAS2ASI.EXE    GWBASIC to ASIC conversion utility
               B2A1.EXE       Required by BAS2ASI.EXE
               B2A2.EXE       Required by BAS2ASI.EXE
               ASIC.DOC       ASIC Reference Manual
               ASICV500.NOT   List of New Features in ASIC Version 5.00
               ASIC.IDX       Index file for online keyword help
               ASICM.IDX      Index file for online menu help
               LIFE.ASI       Sample Program --demonstration ASIC
                              Program
               DBGTUTOR.ASI   Source Program for Debugger Tutorial
               FILEDEMO.ASI   Sample Program -- various ASIC file I/O
                              statements
               MOUSE.ASI      Sample Program -- demonstrates use of
                              adding mouse routines to an ASIC program
               CALC.ASI       Sample Program -- calculator
               CALLSRCH.ASI   Sample Program -- calls an assembly
                              language object file
               CALLSRCH.PRJ   Project file for CALLSRCH.ASI
               SRCH.ASM       Sample Program -- called by CALLSRCH.ASI
               CALLSUB.ASI    Sample Program -- calls ASIC sub
                              TESTSUB.ASI
               CALLSUB.PRJ    Project file for CALLSUB.ASI
               TESTSUB.ASI    Sample Program -- ASIC sub called by
                              CALLSUB
               TESTSUB.PRJ    Project file for TESTSUB.ASI
               AREA.BAS       Sample GWBASIC program (for BAS2ASI.EXE)
               ORDER.FRM      Order Form

ASIC 5.00 is provided as shareware.  Under the shareware concept, you can
test a program before you buy it.  If you find it suitable for your needs and
make use of this program, you are expected to send a $20 registration fee
(plus $5.00 shipping/handling).

Feel free to distribute this software to others.  However, you may not charge
for the distribution of this software to others, nor may you alter the
software or this documentation.

Registered users of any version of ASIC will receive a diskette containing
the current version of ASIC, plus may purchase future updates at half of the
normal registration price.  A printed manual is available to registered users
for an additional $ 10.00.

Refer to the ORDER.FRM File for full order information.
Please send registration fees and suggestions to:

          80/20 Software
          P.O. Box 2952
          Raleigh, NC  27602-2952

          Phone:  (919) 870-1680
          Fax:    (919) 870-7968

Please mention the version of ASIC in any correspondence
          (This is ASIC Version 5.00)

You can also send questions/comments on GEnie and Compuserve via EMAIL:

          Compuserve                    73065,1302
          Compuserve (via Internet)     73065.1302@compuserve.com
          GEnie                         DVISTI

Your registration fee entitles you to use this software on a single computer.
You are not obtaining title to the software or any copyright rights.  You may
not sublicense, rent, lease, convey, modify, translate, convert to another
programming language, decompile, or disassemble the software for any purpose.

Site licenses are available, write for details.

*****************************************************************************
80/20 SOFTWARE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES RELATING TO THIS SOFTWARE, WHETHER
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND ALL SUCH WARRANTIES
ARE SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMED.  NEITHER 80/20 SOFTWARE, NOR ANYONE ELSE WHO HAS
BEEN INVOLVED IN THE CREATION, PRODUCTION, OR DELIVERY OF THIS SOFTWARE SHALL
BE LIABLE FOR ANY INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT
OF THE USE OF OR INABILITY TO USE SUCH SUCH SOFTWARE EVEN IF 80/20 SOFTWARE
HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES OR CLAIMS.  IN NO EVENT
SHALL 80/20 SOFTWARE'S LIABILITY FOR ANY DAMAGES EVER EXCEED THE PRICE PAID
FOR THE LICENSE TO USE THE SOFTWARE, REGARDLESS OF THE FORM OF CLAIM.  THE
PERSON USING THE SOFTWARE BEARS ALL RISKS AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE
OF THE SOFTWARE.
     Some states do not allow the exclusion of the limit of liability for
consequential or incidental damages, so the above limitation may not apply to
you.
     This agreement shall be governed by the laws of the state of North
Carolina and shall inure to the benefit of 80/20 Software and any successors,
administrators, heirs, and assigns.  Any action or proceeding brought by
either party against the other arising out of or related to this agreement
shall be brought only in a STATE or FEDERAL COURT of competent jurisdiction
located in Wake County, North Carolina.  The parties hereby consent to in
personam jurisdiction of said courts.
*****************************************************************************