SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMS WRITTEN IN BASIC (for PCs)
==============================================

This directory contains programs shared by Phillip Bigelow at
https://web.archive.org/web/20160810162309/http://www.scn.org/~bh162/basic_programs.html

    Below are some old freeware science programs for PCs, written in the old
    BASIC language, that I wrote many years ago (around 1989). They range
    from ridiculously simple to almost sophisticated. I recently
    rediscovered the programs when I was cleaning my house. Rather than
    throw them away, I thought I'd put them on the web. Best of all, they
    are guaranteed to be virus free and they won't cost you a cent! I hope
    you enjoy using them.


Hell Creek Life Â© 1997-2009 Phillip Bigelow

---

[`gr-circl`](gr-circl.txt)
This program computes great circle distances between any two points on
the earth if their latitudes and longitudes are known. It also
calculates the antipode for any location on Earth, and it can compute
the Earth's rotational velocity for any latitude.

[`appa-dip`](appa-dip.txt)
A structural geology program that calculates the "true dip" angle of a
rock bed if you know: 1) the "apparent dip" angle of the bed (as seen in
a highway road cut or outcrop); 2) the strike of the dipping bed; and 3)
the strike of the road cut on which the "apparent dip" angle is
observed.

[`eventti`](eventti.txt)
This program will record the date and time of any event or events
whenever a key is pressed. The program saves the events and their times
to a text file. It is useful for recording and tabulating events. It
also makes an "okay" stopwatch (accurate to one second).

[`g-calc`](g-calc.txt)
Do you have a laboratory centrifuge and you want to know the 'g' for a
given RPM? Or do you want to play around with artificial 'gravity'
experiments? This little calculator will calculate acceleration (and
'g') for any given radius of rotation and rotation rate.

[`timer`](timer.txt)
This is a simple timer/alarm clock program. You can set the alarm for
weeks or months in advance (of course, your computer must be running
continuously (duh)). The timer/alarm is accurate to one second. The
alarm now includes DB-9 serial port (on COM 2) output as an option! (in
order to utilize the serial port output option, your computer must have
a serial port, or if you have a PC with the newer USB bus, then you will
need to buy a USB card that emulates the old serial port).

[`point-co`](point-co.txt)
This geology program uses the computer's keyboard as a tabulating device
for point counting sedimentary rocks in thin section (each key is
programed to represent a specific mineral). The program also gives
ternary percentage summaries and other statistics, and it saves the
results to a text file. With a little tweaking, it could be adapted for
point counting volcanic rocks in thin section.

[`prime-no`](prime-no.txt)
A neat little program that uses a simple "brute force" algorithm to
determine if an input number is a prime number. Really simple code. Can
you improve it?

[`x-ray`](x-ray.txt)
This X-ray diffraction (geology) program will convert d-spacing (in
angstroms) into 2 theta (in degrees) *or* from 2 theta into d-spacing.

[`antipode`](antipode.txt)
This program will calculate the antipode for any point on the Earth.
(The antipode is on the opposite side of the Earth from the input point.
A straight line drawn through the center of the earth would connect the
two points).

[`bivariat`](bivariat.txt)
This program computes simple statistics (mean, standard deviation, and a
correlation coefficient, and it computes a linear regression equation)
for a bunch of X and Y data. The program saves these data and results to
a text file.

[`h2o-pres`](h2o-pres.txt)
This program computes ocean (salt water) pressure, in pounds per square
inch, at any chosen depth.

[`sierpins`](sierpins.txt)
Sierpinski's Triangle. This program demonstrates how some chaotic
systems (such as a throw of a gaming die) can show structure when their
effects are graphically plotted (graphical representations of chaotic
systems, showing strucuture, are often called "attractors").
Sierpinski's Triangle, first described around 1900, is also a good
example of a fractal. It is a useful demo program for math classes,
statistics classes, and introduction to chaos theory.

[`tern-plt`](tern-plt.txt)
This geology program takes percentage results from point counts and
plots them on a ternary graph.

[`tern-ran`](tern-ran.txt)
This is a program that plots randomly-generated trivariate data onto a
ternary diagram. It is an example of a Monte-Carlo simulation. What I
find interesting is that, with less than a few thousand plotted data
points, the graph shows a clear structure (the points tend to congregate
in and around the center of the diagram), but if millions of points are
plotted, the graph will completely fill, indicating that the algorithm
is indeed generating random numbers. I am at a loss as to what is going
on. Do you have an explaination?

[`wave-en`](wave-en.txt)
This program converts a given electromagnetic wavelength into its
corresponding energy (in eV) *or* a given energy into its corresponding
electromagnetic wavelength.
